Title: Archaeology at Qach Rresh

The Rural Landscapes of Iron Age Imperial Mesopotamia project (RLIIM) seeks to understand how imperial polities of ancient Mesopotamia interacted with the landscape via policies of resource extraction, population resettlement, and centralized infrastructure.  So far, the rural hinterlands of the Assyrian Empire have remained largely under-investigated, but have much to reveal about the relationship between Assyrian imperial structure and organic bottom-up growth.

Caption:

Header: The 2023 Season

The 2023 season lasted 5 weeks (April 30-June 4) and involved expanding Operations A and B, opening Operation C, and expanding magnetometry survey coverage to the north and south.

Qach Rresh is remarkably well-suited for geophysical survey investigation.  In addition to Buildings A and B identified in the results from 2021, we now have detected a large complex of rooms further south, consisting of at least 12 rooms in a roughly linear arrangement with additional architectural features present around them.  The rooms making up this structure (which we are calling “Building C”) appear brightly in the magnetometry, which indicates that they are likely filled with the same dumping debris that Op B. contains.  At least 10 rooms have similarly high magnetic signatures, indicating that they are filled with ashy debris and ceramics. Other, similar highly magnetic anomalies in the south likely indicate more rooms filled with debris, though this is more difficult to tell from magnetometry alone.

Header: The 2022 Season
With a season lasting 5 weeks (from August 31 – October 2, 2022) the RLIIM team opened two trenches over the main building remains at Qach Rresh.

Both the buildings in Operation A and Operation B were difficult to identify based on excavation alone, due to significant deterioration in the mudbrick. By using the magnetometry data together with the excavation, we were able to come to several conclusions about the site after one season:
	(1) While we believe the buildings to have been constructed in the Neo-Assyrian period, many of the artifacts collected from the Qach Rresh excavations likely date to the post-Assyrian phase of the Iron Age (c. 600-500 BCE). This conclusion is based on the post-Assyrian forms of the ceramics and the common use of grit instead of chaff as a temper.
	(2) The rooms of Building B (in Operation B) were used as a dump in the post-Assyrian period.

Caption: